# Coding style masterclass



# Topics
* **C/C++ programming language**
* Coding style
* Compiler
* Algorithms
* Data structures



# C/C++ programming language

* ~~Basics of C++~~
* ~~Control structures~~
* ~~Compound data types~~
* ~~Object oriented programming~~
* Advanced concepts



# Today topics

* Type casting
* Preprocessor
* Makefile
* Documentation



# Type casting


# Implicit conversion
Implicit conversions do not require any operator. They are automatically performed when a value is copied to a compatible type.
```cpp
short a=2000;
int b;
b=a;
```


# Explicit conversion
```cpp
 short a=2000;
int b;
b = (int) a;    // c-like cast notation
b = int (a);    // functional notation
```


# Type cast operator
```cpp
class Cents {
private:
    int m_cents;
public:
    Cents(int cents=0) {
        m_cents = cents;
    }

    // Overloaded int cast
    operator int() { return m_cents; }

    int getCents() { return m_cents; }
    void setCents(int cents) { m_cents = cents; }
};
```


# Strong typed conversion
In order to control types of conversions between classes, we have four specific casting operators: dynamic_cast, reinterpret_cast, static_cast and const_cast. Their format is to follow the new type enclosed between angle-brackets and immediately after, the expression to be converted between parentheses.
```cpp
dynamic_cast <new_type> (expression) 
reinterpret_cast <new_type> (expression) 
static_cast <new_type> (expression) 
const_cast <new_type> (expression)
```


# dynamic_cast
dynamic_cast can be used only with pointers and references to objects. Its purpose is to ensure that the result of the type conversion is a valid complete object of the requested class.

* dynamic_cast is always successful when we cast a class to one of its base classes.
* base-to-derived conversions are not allowed with dynamic_cast unless the base class is polymorphic

**note: dynamic_cast requires the Run-Time Type Information (RTTI) to keep track of dynamic types. Some compilers support this feature as an option which is disabled by default. This must be enabled for runtime type checking using dynamic_cast to work properly.**


# Example
```cpp
// dynamic_cast
#include <iostream>
#include <exception>
using namespace std;
class CBase { virtual void dummy() {} };
class CDerived: public CBase { int a; };
int main () {
  try {
    CBase * pba = new CDerived;
    CBase * pbb = new CBase;
    CDerived * pd;
    pd = dynamic_cast<CDerived*>(pba);
    if (pd==0) cout << "Null pointer on first type-cast" << endl;
    pd = dynamic_cast<CDerived*>(pbb);
    if (pd==0) cout << "Null pointer on second type-cast" << endl;
  } catch (exception& e) {
    cout << "Exception: " << e.what();
  }
  return 0; 
}
```


# static_cast
static_cast can perform conversions between pointers to related classes, not only from the derived class to its base, but also from a base class to its derived.

**No safety check is performed during runtime to check if the object being converted is in fact a full object of the destination type.**

The overhead of the type-safety checks of dynamic_cast is avoided.

```cpp
class CBase {};
class CDerived: public CBase {};
CBase * a = new CBase;
CDerived * b = static_cast<CDerived*>(a);
```


# reinterpret_cast
reinterpret_cast converts any pointer type to any other pointer type, even of unrelated classes. The operation result is a simple binary copy of the value from one pointer to the other. All pointer conversions are allowed: neither the content pointed nor the pointer type itself is checked.

```cpp
class A {};
class B {};
A * a = new A;
B * b = reinterpret_cast<B*>(a);
```


# const_cast
This type of casting manipulates the constness of an object, either to be set or to be removed.

const_cast is used to remove the const-ness from references and pointers that ultimately refer to something that is not const.
```cpp
int i = 0;
const int& ref = i;
const int* ptr = &i;

const_cast<int&>(ref) = 3;
*const_cast<int*>(ptr) = 3;
```
```cpp
const int i = 0;
const int& ref = i;
const int* ptr = &i;

const_cast<int&>(ref) = 3;
*const_cast<int*>(ptr) = 3;
```


# typeid
typeid allows to check the type of an expression:
```cpp
typeid (expression)
```
This operator returns a reference to a constant object of type type_info that is defined in the standard header file <typeinfo>. This returned value can be compared with another one using operators == and != or can serve to obtain a null-terminated character sequence representing the data type or class name by using its name() member. 

When typeid is applied to classes typeid uses the RTTI to keep track of the type of dynamic objects. When typeid is applied to an expression whose type is a polymorphic class, the result is the type of the most derived complete object.


# Example
```cpp
// typeid
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>
using namespace std;
int main () {
  int * a,b;
  a=0; b=0;
  if (typeid(a) != typeid(b))
  {
    cout << "a and b are of different types:\n";
    cout << "a is: " << typeid(a).name() << '\n';
    cout << "b is: " << typeid(b).name() << '\n';
  }
  return 0; 
}
```



# Preprocessor
Preprocessor directives are lines included in the code of our programs that are not program statements but directives for the preprocessor. These lines are always preceded by a hash sign (#). The preprocessor is executed before the actual compilation of code begins, therefore the preprocessor digests all these directives before any code is generated by the statements.

These preprocessor directives extend only across a single line of code. As soon as a newline character is found, the preprocessor directive is considered to end. No semicolon (;) is expected at the end of a preprocessor directive. The only way a preprocessor directive can extend through more than one line is by preceding the newline character at the end of the line by a backslash (\).


# macro definitions (#define, #undef)
When the preprocessor encounters this directive, it replaces any occurrence of identifier in the rest of the code by replacement. This replacement can be an expression, a statement, a block or simply anything.
```cpp
#define TABLE_SIZE 100
int table1[TABLE_SIZE];
int table2[TABLE_SIZE];
```
After the preprocessor has replaced TABLE_SIZE, the code becomes equivalent to: 
```cpp
int table1[100];
int table2[100];
```
\#define can work also with parameters to define function macros

A macro lasts until it is undefined with the #undef preprocessor


# macro definitions (continued)
Function macro definitions accept two special operators (# and ##) in the replacement sequence:
If the operator # is used before a parameter is used in the replacement sequence, that parameter is replaced by a string literal (as if it were enclosed between double quotes)
```cpp
 #define str(x) #x
cout << str(test);

cout << "test";
```
The operator ## concatenates two arguments leaving no blank spaces between them:
```cpp
 #define glue(a,b) a ## b
glue(c,out) << "test";
```


# Advanced example
```cpp
class AstVisitor {
public:
  ~virtual AstVisitor() {}

  virtual void visitBoolLiteral(BoolLiteral* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitNumLiteral(NumLiteral* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitStringLiteral(StringLiteral* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitUnaryOpExpr(UnaryOpExpr* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitBinaryOpExpr(BinaryOpExpr* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitAssignmentExpr(AssignmentExpr* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitConditionalExpr(ConditionalExpr* expr) = 0;
  virtual void visitIfThenStmt(IfThenStmt* expr) = 0;
  // 30 more of these, you get the idea...
};

enum AstType {
  kBoolLiteral,
  kNumLiteral,
  kStringLiteral,
  kUnaryOpExpr,
  kBinaryOpExpr,
  // again, you get the idea...
}; 

const char* typeString(AstType type) {
  switch (type) {
    case kBoolLiteral:  return "BoolLiteral";
    case kIntLiteral:   return "IntLiteral";
    case kNumLiteral:   return "NumLiteral";
    case kUnaryOpExpr:  return "UnaryOpLiteral";
    case kBinaryOpExpr: return "BinaryOpLiteral";
    // yup...
  }
} 

```


# Example continued
```cpp
#define AST_NODE_LIST(code) \
    code(BoolLiteral)       \
    code(NumLiteral)        \
    code(StringLiteral)     \
    code(UnaryOpExpr)       \
    ...

class AstVisitor {
public:
  ~virtual AstVisitor() {}

  #define DEFINE_VISIT(type)  \
  virtual void visit##type(type* expr) = 0
  AST_NODE_LIST(DEFINE_VISIT)
  #undef DEFINE_VISIT // Clean it up since we're done with it.
};

#define DEFINE_ENUM_TYPE(type) k##type,
enum AstType {
  AST_NODE_LIST(DEFINE_ENUM_TYPE)
};
#undef DEFINE_ENUM_TYPE

#define DEFINE_TYPE_STRING(type) case k##type: return #type;
const char* typeString(AstType type) {
  switch (type) {
    AST_NODE_LIST(DEFINE_TYPE_STRING)
  }
}
#undef DEFINE_TYPE_STRING
``` 


# Conditional inclusions (#ifdef, #ifndef, #if, #endif, #else and #elif)
These directives allow to include or discard part of the code of a program if a certain condition is met.

```cpp
#ifdef TABLE_SIZE
int table[TABLE_SIZE];
#endif 

#if !defined TABLE_SIZE
#define TABLE_SIZE 100
#elif defined ARRAY_SIZE
#define TABLE_SIZE ARRAY_SIZE
int table[TABLE_SIZE];
```


# Error directive (#error)
This directive aborts the compilation process when it is found, generating a compilation the error that can be specified as its parameter:
```cpp
#ifndef __cplusplus
#error A C++ compiler is required!
#endif
```


# Include
When the preprocessor finds an #include directive it replaces it by the entire content of the specified file.

There are two ways to specify a file to be included:
```cpp
#include "file"
#include <file>
```

The only difference between both expressions is the places (directories) where the compiler is going to look for the file. In the first case where the file name is specified between double-quotes, the file is searched first in the same directory that includes the file containing the directive. In case that it is not there, the compiler searches the file in the default directories where it is configured to look for the standard header files.
If the file name is enclosed between angle-brackets \<\> the file is searched directly where the compiler is configured to look for the standard header files. Therefore, standard header files are usually included in angle-brackets, while other specific header files are included using quotes.


# Predefined macro names
```cpp
// standard macro names
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;
int main() {
    cout << "This is the line number " << __LINE__; 
    cout << " of file " << __FILE__ << ".\n";
    cout << "Its compilation began " << __DATE__; 
    cout << " at " << __TIME__ << ".\n";
    cout << "The compiler gives a __cplusplus value of "; 
    cout << __cplusplus;
    return 0;
}
```



# Makefile
Make is the original tool for implementing a build system. It is a specialized programming language for describing how derived files can be created from source files.

Make is a programming language based on logic programming. A logic programming language uses rules to describe how computations are performed. In the case of Make, the rules describe how derived files may be constructed from source files.


# Makefile
* A Make program is written in a file called "Makefile". (Note that there is no file extension.)
* A makefile consists of a series of rules. Each rule must be separated by one or more blank lines.
* If a rule has a command, the command must be written immediately below the first line of the rule (the one with the targets and dependencies), and must be indented with a single tab character.
* Pattern rules should appear first, before the rules that build specific targets.
* The first non-pattern rule in the makefile is the default rule. When you run the make command and do not explicitly specify a target, make will attempt to build the target(s) specified by the default rule. Typically, a makefile will contain a default rule for a target called all.


# Macro
A make macro is essentially a variable with a string value. Macros are useful for defining text that will be referenced multiple times. For example, it is common to define a SRC macro which specifies the names of all of the source files. E.g.:

```make
SRC = calc.c expr.c parse.c err.c
```

The value of a macro can be expanded using the syntax $(macro name). E.g., an occurrence of

```make
$(SRC)
```

would expand to

```make
calc.c expr.c parse.c err.c
```


# Rules
The general form of a make rule looks like this:

```make
targets : dependencies
        command
```

The targets and dependencies are simply lists of files. The dependencies are the files that are required to build each of the target files.

The command describes how to run a program that will use the dependencies to generate (or regenerate) the targets. Note that the command is optional: we'll see why in a moment.

Example: if a C source file is a complete program, then a single command can be used to compile an executable from that source file. For example:
```make
hello.exe : hello.c
        gcc -o hello.exe hello.c
```


# Pattern Rules
One of the most powerful features of make is pattern rules. A pattern rule describes how to generate a category of output files based on a category of input files.

For example, when compiling a program consisting of multiple C source files, each source file is first compiled into an object file. Object files usually have the file extension ".o". The following pattern rule describes how to compile a C source file into an object file:

```make
%.o : %.c
        gcc -c $*.c -o $*.o
```


# Pattern Rules (continued)
The "%" character in the target and dependency is a wildcard: it must match the same sequence of characters in both the target filename and the dependency filename. That means, for example, that the source file "calc.c" will be compiled into an object file called "calc.o", because the wildcard matches the common portion of each filename, namely "calc".

In the command associated with the pattern rule, the special character sequence "$*" can be used to specify whatever sequence of characters was matched by the "%" wildcard. That means when the rule is applied to compile expr.o from expr.c, the command executed will be
```make
gcc -c expr.c -o expr.o
```


# Dependency rules
One limitation of pattern rules is that there may be other required source files needed to build a particular derived file in addition to the dependency file described by the pattern. For example, the object file "expr.o" might require not only "expr.c" as a source file, but also "parse.h", "err.h", and "expr.h". This is a common situation in languages like C and C++ where header files are used for definitions shared between multiple source code files.

We can solve this problem using a dependency rule: that is a rule that describes target files and dependency files, but does not specify a command. For example:
```make
expr.o : expr.c parse.h err.h expr.h

```


# Automatic header dependency generation
Maintaining header file dependencies "by hand" is tedious and error prone. Fortunately, most compilers can automate the generation of dependencies. For example, gcc has a -M option to generate a dependency rule for a particular source file.

```sh
gcc -M expr.c 

expr.o: expr.c parse.h err.h expr.h
 ```
The output of gcc -M for all source files can be collected into an auxiliary makefile. This auxiliary makefile can then be automatically loaded by the main makefile so that the latest header file dependencies are accounted for. This is often done by a depend target. E.g.
```make
depend :
        gcc -M $(SRC) > depend.mak
```


# Automatic header dependency generation
```make
ifeq ($(shell if [ -r depend.mak ]; then echo "yes"; fi),yes)
include depend.mak
endif
```
This approach still requires the developer to build the depend target whenever source or header files are modified in a way that might affect header dependencies. If the developer forgets to do this, then the excecutable might not be built correctly. A very simple approach to making header dependency generation happen automatically is to ensure that the depend target is a prerequisite for all other targets in the makefile. E.g.: 
```make
all : depend
        $(MAKE) calc.exe
```


# Example
Check out [this simple example](https://gist.github.com/BartG95/50686c7cd2f1f4da7a0c043bcdc436d6) or [this advanced example](https://gist.github.com/maxtruxa/4b3929e118914ccef057f8a05c614b0f)

For example, consider the following declaration:
```make
all: library.cpp main.cpp
```
In this case:

* `$@` evaluates to all
* `$<` evaluates to library.cpp
* `$^` evaluates to library.cpp main.cpp



# Documentation
We document C++ code in two ways:

1. By writing documentation blocks for all public or protected C++ components (namespaces, types, methods, functions, and constants).
2. By commenting our code internally with C++ comments (`//` or `/* .. */`). These comments are meant to be read only by developers reading and editing the source code.

Suggested framework for documentation is [doxygen](http://www.doxygen.org/)

Example of [output generated](https://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/results.html)


# Documenting function
```cpp
/**
 * Sum numbers in a vector.
 *
 * @param values Container whose values are summed.
 * @return sum of `values`, or 0.0 if `values` is empty.
 */
double sum(std::vector<double> & const values) {
    ...
}
```


# Documenting template
```cpp
/**
 * Storage for arbitrary data with log(N) lookup.
 *
 * ...
 *
 * @tparam T the type of data stored in the table
 * @tparam ComparatorT callable defining a strict weak ordering for objects
 *     of type `T`. Its `operator()` must accept two `T` and return `true`
 *     if and only if the first argument comes before the second. It must
 *     not throw exceptions.
 */
template <typename T, typename ComparatorT = std::less<T>>
class LookupTable
{
    ...
}

```


# Advanced example
```cpp
/**
 *  A test class. A more elaborate class description.
 */
class Javadoc_Test
{
  public:
    /**
     * An enum.
     * More detailed enum description.
     */
    enum TEnum {
          TVal1, /**< enum value TVal1. */
          TVal2, /**< enum value TVal2. */
          TVal3  /**< enum value TVal3. */
         }
       *enumPtr, /**< enum pointer. Details. */
       enumVar;  /**< enum variable. Details. */

      /**
       * A constructor.
       * A more elaborate description of the constructor.
       */
      Javadoc_Test();
      /**
       * A destructor.
       * A more elaborate description of the destructor.
       */
     ~Javadoc_Test();

      /**
       * a normal member taking two arguments and returning an integer value.
       * @param a an integer argument.
       * @param s a constant character pointer.
       * @see Javadoc_Test()
       * @see ~Javadoc_Test()
       * @see testMeToo()
       * @see publicVar()
       * @return The test results
       */
       int testMe(int a,const char *s);

      /**
       * A pure virtual member.
       * @see testMe()
       * @param c1 the first argument.
       * @param c2 the second argument.
       */
       virtual void testMeToo(char c1,char c2) = 0;

      /**
       * a public variable.
       * Details.
       */
       int publicVar;

      /**
       * a function variable.
       * Details.
       */
       int (*handler)(int a,int b);
};
```


# More info
* Documentation is available [here](https://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/manual/docblocks.html)
* For ease use doxywizard (doxygen-gui on ubuntu). [Tutorial](https://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/manual/doxywizard_usage.html)



# Homework
* Organize matrix code into a project with header file(s), source file(s) and makefile.
* Document each method of your class/function/variable/etc.
* Add documentation generation to makefile as target
